Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Caroline Sevens.
Venue Swicker Office.
And the date today is Tuesday the 18th of November.
Caroline, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full for posterity?
Of course. C-A-R-O-L-I-N-E-S-E-M-M-E-N-S.
Thank you very much indeed.
So how did you first come into contact with Swicker?
I had graduated university in 2001 with an English degree, which allows you to do nothing.
So I knew I wanted to specialise in something.
So I came back to Cardiff and studied at the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama
and did a post-grad in Arts Management.
Towards the end of my year there, we had to do a month work placement
and I worked for David Baxter in the Education Department of St David's Hall.
And whilst we were there, he was talking about what I wanted to do after I graduated.
And look for a job was obviously my main priority.
And he at the time was trustee for Swicker and said that there was a place coming up for an administrator,
as the administrator who'd been here for many, many years was leaving,
and put me forward for an interview, which I came to, got the job and the rest is history.
2002.
2002. So talking of history, how many Cardiff Carnivals did you help create and support
and run around like a crazy girl?
Looking at the list, I think it's four between 2002 and 2005,
starting with Citizenship and ending with Doc's Wales window on the world,
trading places in spirit of Mother Earth.
And do you still have the emotional scars?
Absolutely. Physical, emotional. No, not at all.
Yeah.
What are your memories of Cardiff Carnival?
Let's start with Cardiff Carnival in particular.
Well, I guess it's an unusual one for me being on an administrative side
rather than being a participator or an artist or a spectator.
I had seen the carnival.
I'd never deliberately come to see the carnivals, but I was very much aware of them.
I'd been in the place where they were happening, so I knew that they happened.
I hadn't obviously had any idea on the kind of background to them,
all the workshops that took place, all the hard work behind the scenes.
I only just witnessed the carnival day itself and the parade passing and thinking,
oh, that's spectacular and didn't think too much of it.
So, you know, coming from it from the other angle and seeing all the work
that was involved was a big, big eye-opener.
It was also my first, I say my first job.
I'd had jobs before, but, you know, a full-time permanent position in terms of the arts.
It was so it was, yeah, it was a massive eye-opener to see all the work
that went involved, all the people that kind of came and got involved,
the communities that built over those few months of the mass camps
and then the actual days itself.
And yeah, the actual parade is almost this kind of strange sense of anticlimax
of the fact that you've worked with these people, you know, day in, day out.
You know, for all the time leading up to it and in all the mass camps,
which were, you know, like a proper family and a community got built in those in those weeks.
And then whilst the parade was amazing, there was also that sense of and what happens now.
And, you know, for the people working on it, it wasn't too bad because back then,
we would shut down for a week, get everything back in a van and then ship to Swansea
and, you know, and do something in Swansea a few weeks later.
But yeah, it was a strange sense of amazing anticlimax.
I guess it's the same thing as putting on a theatre show.
You know, you work really hard, you do a show for a week and then that's it.
And you wave goodbye and hope to see each other next time.
So, yeah, it's an amazing experience.
Certainly that that that whole phenomena of post-Carnival blues is very real
because people get to a very positive space and they find themselves in this
sort of mini village of collective creativity.
And then they get to hopefully, well, generally be applauded and cheered,
sometimes in sunshine, sometimes in rain,
after which, yes, life seems a little less colorful and flamboyant, doesn't it?
I mean, that's a real phenomenon for people.
Yeah. And the Cardiff one for me, coming from Cardiff or just outside Cardiff
and, you know, living here my life and living a few years away from university.
It was it opened up a whole new part of Cardiff for me.
When I was growing up in a fairly middle class,
you know, upbringing, butan, you just wouldn't go to, you know, butan was rough.
It was scary. It was dangerous.
Ironically, my dad grew up in East Tindall Street.
You know, he was a docks boy and even he was kind of raising eyebrows about,
you know, it's changed since I was a boy back in the 1940s, 50s.
It's very different. There's a lot of black people there.
There's a lot of immigrants.
You know, is it safe to be there?
And yet I and I I hope it's still the same to this day.
What I found from Butan was the residents of Butan and what people
will class as the scary, the dangerous, the rough, the the unknown
quantity of Butan with the strongest community I've ever, ever experienced
and and have done since.
I mean, I'm not saying their lives were easy.
I'm sure they all had their, you know, their problems to deal with.
But the sense of community that was there and Fatima, who used to run
the the youth pavilion or manage the youth pavilion,
was just this amazing matriarch figure and had every single one of those young people.
You know, they they did whatever she said.
And mind you, I don't think I'd ever cross Fatima either.
But, you know, it was this amazing sense.
She knew them. She knew their family.
She knew their problems. She knew their positive sides.
And she would do everything to get them involved.
And that real sense of, you know, this wasn't a scary community at all.
It was just a very, very close knit community.
And to be allowed for those few years to be almost a part of that community
was actually I think it's a bit of a privilege.
You know, it's not very often you get to break into such a strong, strong community
and get to be a part of them for those for those few months.
And, you know, I went to Pumps in Butan that I would never, ever dream of going into.
Or since without their, you know, without their support,
I was going to say protection, but I'll use the word support still.
Yeah. And, you know, and just to think that that there was,
you know, these communities are out there and there's actually
not nothing that's scary about them.
But you got this perceived sense of threat or unknown.
And, yeah, it really broke down some barriers for me about, you know, working
outside my comfort zone.
Yes, I think Fatima's ultimate sanction was I'm going to go and tell your parents
because she could, you know, and they would listen to her and share that.
Her concerns.
I think she probably she threatened me that went to do whatever I was told.
Dear, dear, dear.
And obviously, Carnival Day itself is affected by the weather.
I mean, in the period you were with Swicker, did we have one of those Carnival
Days where it was deluge or were you blessed by good weather on Carnival Day?
You know what?
I think one of them was wet and I'm not.
I don't think it must have been too bad, because I'm not sure it even mattered.
You've dried out now. That much.
I remember certainly one or two beautiful, scorching hot Carnival Days,
which is, you know, a rarity in Cardiff on its own.
But I'm trying to I think there was one where it rained quite heavily in the morning,
but maybe it actually had dried up by parade time.
And I think as long as it had actually dried up by parade time,
everyone was so ecstatic that it stopped absolutely pouring down.
I think a lot of.
Yeah, a lot was forgiven for that.
So, no, just just dry ones, I think.
I think you were very lucky then.
I think it was. Yes.
2005, six and seven were the famous trilogy where we got completely soaked
from all day till the end of the day.
In terms of carnival creations and costumes,
are there any that stick in your mind, if a particular fondness or?
Do you know what? I'm going to I'm going to sing out for the end of the year.
I before I joined Swicker, I worked as a theatrical costumier.
My mother owned Marigold Costumes, which was based in Bute Town.
She did for many years and I worked there solidly during
university holidays and the summer holidays.
And I got pretty proficient using a sewing machine.
And then I joined the mass camp and I would come after my,
you know, nine to five at Swicker, I would go straight down to the mass camp.
And there I was greeted with overlockers and I'd never, ever,
ever seen an overlocker before.
And I've wanted one ever since.
And I was put to work.
So I'm going to ignore the feathers and the sequins.
I don't care those because I made hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of trousers and tunics,
the boring stuff that goes underneath all the beautiful base costume,
the base costumes. Exactly.
And so I'm going to speak out for the base costumes.
And I made these amazing trousers,
the ones that were just one solid piece of material.
And you had to fold them in a special way.
And they were amazing.
Wrap around trousers. They're still, you know.
Yeah, absolutely.
One size fits pretty much everyone, give or take. Yes.
Wrap around trousers, tunics and so I.
But do you know what?
Did we actually chain you to the sewing machine?
Do some people claim that happened?
Yeah, I think those chains were, they were metaphorical, I think.
I used to get self-inflicted.
This would be one for the the the annals.
I used to get self-inflicted eye infections,
because if you stay too long at the overlockers, the tiny fibres.
Wow. I didn't know that.
I don't know because I was there.
I used to get down from about four and I'd finish my maths.
Finished at ten. Yeah. Yeah.
So it was that six solid hours being sat at the sewing machines.
And I loved it, though.
Were your lawyers being touch or? Yeah. Excellent.
Yeah. Obviously, I was going to be an eye model.
But yeah, it was it was.
Yeah. But you know what?
That for me was fine because I was a paid member of staff, although technically
my my job did not extend to be going down to the mass camp every night.
But nobody wants to do the boring base layers.
Everyone wants to get the glue guns out and, you know, get creative.
And I was like, no, let the community do that.
That's what they're here for. Let me just.
The hard slog, the hard slog.
And that was absolutely fine for me, because, yeah, I'm more than happy.
It's more than happy to do that kind of work so that people could have fun
with feathers and sequins.
And did you ever get to
play a costume on Carnival Day yourself?
I've never, ever got to play.
I know I feel very bad about that.
No, don't. I have got the most beautiful array of high vis vests
and jackets, which I still own to this day.
And I remember my first ever time
and it wasn't a carnival, it was when we were doing in Caerphilly.
But I decided we needed I needed a proper coat because the vests
that we got away with in the summer for the carnivals wouldn't wouldn't work
for a cold
December winter's carnival.
And I went out to one of these, I don't know, HSS, one of these,
you know, tool supply stores.
Bought myself a beautiful high vis jacket, which I still have.
And I'll never forget opening it.
And there was a big, big warning sign that says if this jacket is not worn
done up, it is ineffective.
And I love that this enormous full length
high vis jacket that nobody would see me in unless I did the zip up.
No, I was quite happy with my swicker t shirt and my high vis vest.
And yeah, that was my costume for my carnivals.
I like the power, the power that high vis vest got you.
I could stop traffic.
I was up there stopping traffic, putting my arm out.
People would stop.
People wouldn't have done that if I was wearing feather and sequins.
I, you know, I wanted the power, the power of high vis vest.
As you mentioned, I mean, people, community participants came from all
walks of life and many different groups.
Is there any individual group that sticks in your mind in that period?
I was always a bit of a feisty with all you ran in fear.
No, no.
From the room where they were.
I don't think so. I was always quite.
There are a couple of groups that I always had that kind of little bit
of jealousy about the drummers, the Samba Gallas.
And there are a couple of other ones.
They were just cool.
They were just, you know, that ability to make those absolutely amazing
sounds and you didn't have to be.
Well, from what I can say, you don't have to be an expert drummer,
but, you know, they had people from all different kind of levels
and they were always brilliant.
But once I really had the proper jealousy about in my high vis jacket,
were, of course, the dancers who used to turn up and they used to practice
and they used to be in the morning.
The weather was nice.
They'd be out in the front of the youth pavilion and that kind of car parking area.
They'd be practicing or inside if it was where fighting over what music needed
to be played so they could practice their dances and they just they were.
They were beautiful.
They were glamorous.
They were, you know, they were fabulous dancers.
Yeah, I quite, you know, in a different in a different world.
I would like to be there. Yeah. Yeah.
Quite right, too. Yeah.
So ConCon has been and that's to some degree still is the flagship project for Swicker.
But of course, as administrator for the company,
you know, number two in a hierarchy of two.
We worked on a number of other different projects.
I mean, any others come to mind as we're chatting?
I think favorite always will be a big favorite was when we did
the Myths, Minds and Memories up in Blind Avent.
It was it was a really pivotal one.
I think so many ways it was that first HLF grant for the Your Heritage Program.
You know, the got the full amount of the grant and that allowed the artists
to do, you know, some lovely things.
And again, it was that kind of breaking into such a close knit
community as Bliner.
People are still astonished that I can find Bliner on a map so quickly
and drive them there should they wish, because, you know,
up and down the valleys roads to get to Bliner.
And yeah, that was just an amazing project to be part of.
I think it's such a small community, complete community involvement in one project.
Got my DVD, although obviously I'm not a fan of the DVD.
I've got my DVD, although I've still got my DVDs and carnivals as well.
But, you know, I've still got it all.
And every now and then I just clear out.
And I thought, oh, yeah, I did get to hang on to those.
I'm not saying I watch them every day, but I'm really proud of really proud of achieving.
So, yeah, happy.
That was a good one to remember.
Actually, they all do.
I mean, I think that's the whole point of what we did.
I mean, I work now in a far larger organization.
I work for the National Museum and we do projects here and there.
But everything we did at Swicker,
there was such a big outcome after everything we did, which is, you know,
the whole point of it, you know, after every carnival, you'd get 100,
a thousand, two thousand people all there in costume, dancing, walking, drumming,
shaking, limping, however, you know, I like the limping.
That was me, you know, through the carnival and even
we did the schools ones in Blinavon or we did the the big theatre production
in Blina or the carnivals in Kivili.
There was always such a big outcome.
There was a sense of achievement.
It wasn't a sense of, OK, we did some workshops and they were great.
OK, we're also doing that and that.
It was such a at the time we were trying to be a small team.
And, you know, what we put out was massive.
And it's always used to have that kind of sense of achievement
when you're doing your kind of post carnival or post project
performance indicators.
And then you can get to say, you know, how many people got involved?
Yeah, we can put, you know, a few thousand.
How many people watch? Yeah, we can put tens of thousands.
You know, it was that real sense of impact on every single thing we do.
And there can't be very many
jobs in this field or, well, you know, certainly not in this field
where you get that really sense of kind of achievement and a massive,
massive outcome after every single project you do.
And I think that's something to be very proud of.
Talking to be very proud,
I wish to proudly bestow you the verbal honour of Carnival Hero.
Caroline Simmons, thank you very, very much.
Thank you very much.
And for those who don't know,
Baby Deleth has been sleeping ever so quietly during the interview.
Thank you very much indeed for your carnival memories. Thank you.